# Background reading

This course has a rather different focus from many introductory courses to
Python. Typical courses in Python are for people who want to learn
"programming" in the abstract, and there are some very good books and online
courses for this; see below for some suggestions.

## Python for scientific data analysis

This course concentrates on using Python for data analysis, so it has a strong
focus on the libraries that you need to get, select, visualize and analyze
data. Unlike many courses on Python and data analysis, this course does not
assume you have done any programming before. As yet there are no good printed
books that we know if, that follow this scheme.  For online material, the
[Berkeley course in data science](https://www.inferentialthinking.com) is
a very good introduction, that proceeds at a faster pace that we do.  You'll
see that we have used a lot of their material for this course. The [Software
Carpentry](https://software-carpentry.org) organization has good online lessons
that introduce various tools for using code in science, including an
[introduction to
Python](http://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation), although this
lesson goes at a much faster pace than our course. If you want a set of online
materials for using the scientific libraries, that does assume some background
in using Python, try the [Scipy Lectures](https://scipy-lectures.org).   If you
know Python reasonably well, and you need an introduction to data science for
Python, then [Jake VanderPlas'](http://vanderplas.com) [Python data science
handbook](https://jakevdp.github.io/PythonDataScienceHandbook) is a good
resource.  It is very clear, well-written, and up to date, but it is not
suitable for a beginner in Python.

The definitive book on the Pandas data library is [Python for data
analysis](https://wesmckinney.com/book) by Wes McKinney.  It is well-written,
and a good reference, but you may find you need some background to get the best
out of it.

## Python programming in general

You will find many good free online resources for learning Python programming
in general.

My current recommendation is a book and course by [Allen
Downey](https://greenteapress.com/wp) that he first called "Think Like
a Computer Scientist" and later called "Think Python".  It is well-written, and
has gone through several versions, so the material is well tested.

The latest edition of "Think Python" is the second, and you can get it free as
a PDF, or order a print copy - see the [Think Python 2e web
page](https://greenteapress.com/wp/think-python-2e).

There is an interactive edition based on the same original text at [Think Like
a Computer Scientist interactive
edition](https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/thinkcspy/index.html).

## Principles of understanding data

For good discussion of many important topics in understanding data, we highly
recommend the book *Thinking Clearly with Data*, by Bueno de Mesquita and
Fowler (2021).  You can [find this on
Perlego](https://www.perlego.com/book/2646783/thinking-clearly-with-data-a-guide-to-quantitative-reasoning-and-analysis-pdf)
if you have access.

## Visualization

Please consider reading Edward Tufte's extraordinary book on *The Visual
Display of Quantitative Information*.  It is an extremely powerful, cogent and
beautiful exposition of using graphics and plots to convey information in data.
